Add NetworkKind design (Previously NetworkClass) (#4)
kubernetes-sigs/multi-network-api: docs/network-class.md

A `NetworkClass` references a specific Group/Version/Kind (GVK). Any object matching this GVK is considered a network instance belonging to that `NetworkClass`. Users create implementation-defined network objects, while Kubernetes uses NetworkClass to recognize them as pod networks.

The presence of at least one `NetworkClass` object indicates that multi-network functionality is available in the cluster.

```go
// NetworkClass describes a class of pod networks implemented
// by a specific controller and represented by implementation-defined objects.
type NetworkClass struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta
	// Standard object's metadata.
	// More info: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#metadata
	// +optional
	metav1.ObjectMeta
	// spec is the desired state of the NetworkClass.
	// More info: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#spec-and-status
	// +optional
	Spec NetworkClassSpec
}

// NetworkClassSpec describes how network objects of this class are identified.
type NetworkClassSpec struct {
  // TargetType identifies the API type of the network objects
  // belonging to this NetworkClass.

>   TargetType GroupVersionKind

Reviewer: you're already referencing `metav1.ObjectMeta`, you should be able to just use `metav1.GroupVersionKind` too

Author: Nice, thank you. I changed to it.

	Group string

	// Version is the API version of the network object.
	Version string

	// Kind is the Kind of the network object.
	Kind string
}
```

### Attributes

To integrate pod networks with Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA), this proposal defines two new standard device attributes. These attributes allow `ResourceClaims` to select specific pod networks and allow the system to identify devices that attach workloads to a given network.

A device that attaches a workload to a network must report the associated ResourceClaim device status with a reference to the network. The relationship between a device and a network can be determined by matching the device identifier and its attributes in the corresponding ResourceSlice.

```golang
const (
	// StandardDeviceAttributePrefix is the prefix used for standard device attributes.
	StandardDeviceAttributePrefix = "resource.kubernetes.io/" // To be determined.

	// StandardDeviceAttributePodNetwork is a standard device attribute name
	// which describes a pod network.
	// The value is a string value referring to the name of an object from the GVK defined in the 
  // StandardDeviceAttributeNetworkClass attribute.

> 	StandardDeviceAttributePodNetwork resourceapi.QualifiedName = StandardDeviceAttributePrefix + "podNetwork"

Reviewer: if you're doing a `do.ma.in/extra-stuff` type name, the extra stuff should be kebab-case not camelCase.

EDIT: ok, so below I see that this gets represented as `resource.kubernetes.io/podNetwork` in some places, but also as `device.attributes["resource.kubernetes.io"].networkClass`... I guess I'm not sure how this all works. It feels wrong though. 😬 

(also, there's some indentation problem with some of the comments here... tabs vs spaces?)

Author: I used the same format as the rest of the standard DRA attributes: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.35.0/staging/src/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/deviceattribute/attribute.go#L32
I fixed the indentation issue.

	// StandardDeviceAttributePodNetworkNamespace is a standard device attribute name
	// which describes the namespace of a pod network.
	// The value is a string value referring to the namespace of a pod network object.
  // The attribute is optional for the NetworkClass pointing to a non-namespaced GVK.
  // The attribute is mandatory for the NetworkClass pointing to a namespaced GVK.

> 	StandardDeviceAttributePodNetworkNamespace resourceapi.QualifiedName = StandardDeviceAttributePrefix + "podNetworkNamespace"

Reviewer: Might be better to do `namespace/name` rather than two separate properties for the namespaced case?

Author: This is possible, but it would be a bit more complex to select by name in a resourceClaim request.
Namespace is optional, it must be used only if the pod network type is namespaced-scoped.

	// StandardDeviceAttributeNetworkClass is a standard device attribute name
	// which describes a NetworkClass.
	// The value is a string value referring to an existing NetworkClass object.
	StandardDeviceAttributeNetworkClass resourceapi.QualifiedName = StandardDeviceAttributePrefix + "networkClass"
)
```

### Example

Note: OVN-Kubernetes is referenced in examples for illustrative purposes only. This proposal does not assume, require or imply that OVN-Kubernetes will adopt or implement the design described here.

A cluster admin defines which types of pod networks are available in the cluster by creating one or more `NetworkClass` objects. Each `NetworkClass` maps to a specific implementation-defined network resource.

```yaml

> apiVersion: multinetwork.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha1

Reviewer 2: /assign @thockin 
/label api-review

He mentioned during last sig net meeting he wanted to take a look , we can always schedule a session or allocate 30 mins in next sig net meeting to do that, like we do in Gateway API reviews

kind: NetworkClass
metadata:
  name: ovn-kubernetes
spec:

>   targetType:

Reviewer: Looking at this example, "targetType" seems odd. It's not especially a "target"...
(could just be "type", or "implementationType", or "implementation", or "representation", or ...)

Author: I don't have strong preference. I updated to `ImplementationType`. Let's see other opinions.

    group: k8s.ovn.org
    version: v1
    kind: UserDefinedNetwork
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: DeviceClass
metadata:
  name: ovn-kubernetes-udn
spec:
  selectors:
  - cel:
      expression: device.attributes["resource.kubernetes.io"].networkClass == "ovn-kubernetes"
```

A pod network is declaratively defined using an implementation-specific network object. The network implementation prepares the underlying networking resources and advertises the availability of the network via the Resource API using a ResourceSlice.

```yaml
apiVersion: k8s.ovn.org/v1
kind: UserDefinedNetwork
metadata:
  name: blue-network
spec: 
  ...
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: kind-worker-ovn-kubernetes
spec:
  devices:
  - attributes:
      resource.kubernetes.io/podNetwork:
        string: blue-network
      resource.kubernetes.io/networkClass:
        string: ovn-kubernetes
    name: blue-network-resource

>   driver: ovn-kubernetes

Reviewer: `driver` "Must be a DNS subdomain and should end with a DNS domain owned by the vendor of the driver."

Here is an example below:
```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: blue-network-attachment
spec:
...
status:
...
  allocation:
    devices:
      results:
      - device: blue-network-resource
        driver: ovn-kubernetes
        pool: kind-worker
        request: blue-network
```

The identifier of the allocated device is:
* Device Name: blue-network-resource
* Pool Name: kind-worker
* Driver Name: ovn-kubernetes

The device can be retrieved in the ResourceSlice:

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: kind-worker-ovn-kubernetes
spec:
  devices:
  - attributes:
      resource.kubernetes.io/podNetwork:
        string: blue-network

>       resource.kubernetes.io/networkClass:

Reviewer 2: These standardization of attributes also has the level of API review

# NetworkClass

> ## Motivation

Reviewer 3: The other doc covers this, lets remove this section, or add to the other doc if you feel smth is missing. You can add link to the other doc here.

> Kubernetes assumes a single, implicit pod network. As multi-network use cases become more common (secondary networks, tenant isolation, SR-IOV, storage networks, data-plane separation), Kubernetes lacks a standard mechanism to identify and integrate multiple pod networks with core APIs such as Pods, Services, and NetworkPolicy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Kubernetes assumes a single, implicit pod network. As multi-network use cases became common many years ago (secondary networks, tenant isolation, SR-IOV, storage networks, data-plane separation), Kubernetes continues to lacks a standard mechanism to identify and integrate multiple pod networks with core APIs such as Pods, Services, and NetworkPolicy.
```

Currently, these "secondary" networks are defined by implementation-specific CRDs (e.g., OVN-Kubernetes with `UserDefinedNetwork`). Because there is no standard Kubernetes-owned "pointer" to these objects, the rest of the ecosystem remains blind to them.

> This proposal introduces `NetworkClass`, a Kubernetes-owned API that classifies implementation-defined network objects without standardizing their internal semantics and offers an attachment model for pod networks.

Reviewer 4: This is exactly what we proposed for the (now defunct) KNI project. At a high level, I'm very on board and I like the consistency with others (e.g. StorageClass) 👍

Goals:
* Provide a stable, Kubernetes-native abstraction to identify pod networks.
* Leverage Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) to provide a consistent way for pods to attach to these networks via ResourceClaims.
* Enable multiple network implementations to coexist without schema convergence.
* Provide a common mechanism for secondary networks that the kubernetes ecosystem (Services, Network Policies...) could consume.

Non-Goals:
* Standardizing / Definition of an implementation-specific networking model such as IP address management, topology or routing behavior.
* Imposing any non-kubernetes implementation specific underlying mechanism (e.g. CNI)

> ## proposal

Reviewer 3: I am considering this PR to replace #2, hence lets copy (and modify) the overview: https://github.com/mskrocki/multi-network-api/blob/design/docs/core-design.md#overview to introduce the fact that we are leveraging DRA for the whole thing.

Author: I added some paragraph about DRA to the Proposal section.

`NetworkClass` defines a mapping between a Kubernetes-recognized network class and an implementation-specific network object type. It does not define networking behavior or semantics. Instead, it provides a classification and discovery mechanism that allows Kubernetes APIs and controllers to recognize and integrate multiple pod networks.

`NetworkClass` is a cluster-scoped resource. It is expected to be installed by the cluster administrator together with a pod network implementation.

A `NetworkClass` references a specific Group/Version/Kind (GVK). Any object matching this GVK is considered a network instance belonging to that `NetworkClass`. Users create implementation-defined network objects, while Kubernetes uses NetworkClass to recognize them as pod networks.

> The presence of at least one `NetworkClass` object indicates that multi-network functionality is available in the cluster.

Reviewer 2: We had a similar discussion with NetworkPolicy when we tried to add status to represent state, @danwinship may remember better, how do you know if is really available? it feels we should follow the same pattern as gateway and also set the name of the controller https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/gatewayclass/#gatewayclass-status , or there can only be one implementation?

```
kind: GatewayClass
...
status:
  conditions:
  - type: Accepted
    status: False
    Reason: BadFooBar
    Message: "foobar" is an FooBar.
```

Reviewer 3: for a specific kind, yeah we assume there will be 1 implementation. But this is a valid point that we will not be able to distinguish 2 implementation for same CRD, question is, is it smth we should worry about?

Reviewer 2: I see this as the creation of an object does not necessarily mean there is "something" there owning it and guaranteeing it work

Reviewer: So with Gateway, you have a gateway implementation (eg, "envoy") and a cluster owner / infrastructure provider (eg, "GKE"), where in this example envoy actually implements the gateways, but GKE needs to tell it what kinds of gateways it wants it to implement. So GKE deploys envoy, and creates a `GatewayClass`, and then envoy updates the `.status` on the `GatewayClass` to indicate "yes, I can create a gateway that meets these specifications".

With NetworkClass, although Lionel describes it as being "installed by the cluster administrator together with a pod network implementation", it seems like at least in the OVN-Kubernetes UDN case, the NetworkClass ought to just be installed by OVN-Kubernetes itself. Then there's no need for any additional signalling about "yes, this class is supported in this cluster".

(I'm not sure how this would all work with Multus; is "networks created by Multus" a single NetworkClass, or are there different NetworkClasses for different sorts of Multus-created networks?)

So anyway, if NetworkClasses are created independently of the software that implements them, then having status would be good, but if they're created by the software that implements them, then status seems unnecessary.

Author: I guess one of the reason to have the `NetworkClass` being deployed independently would be to have multiple implementation? If we allow multiple implementation per `NetworkClass` (for now, I updated the document to specify it is allowed), then how the conditions would updated, which implementation would be in charge of it?

Gateway API doesn't allow this as a `GatewayClass` is managed by only 1 controller (specified in the `GatewayClass` specs).

```go
// NetworkClass describes a class of pod networks implemented
// by a specific controller and represented by implementation-defined objects.
type NetworkClass struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta
	// Standard object's metadata.
	// More info: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#metadata
	// +optional
	metav1.ObjectMeta
	// spec is the desired state of the NetworkClass.
	// More info: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#spec-and-status
	// +optional
	Spec NetworkClassSpec
}

// NetworkClassSpec describes how network objects of this class are identified.
type NetworkClassSpec struct {
	// Group is the API group of the network object.
	Group string
	// Version is the API version of the network object.
	Version string
	// Kind is the Kind of the network object.

> 	Kind string

Reviewer 2: This looks like a reference field, `NetworkRef` inside the Spec please see the guidelines https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#object-references , the Spec has a different meaning https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#spec-and-status 

See GatewayClass as reference https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/gatewayclass/#gatewayclass-parameters

```
# GatewayClass for Gateways that define Internet-facing applications.
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  name: internet
spec:
  controllerName: "example.net/gateway-controller"
  parametersRef:
    group: example.net
    kind: Config
    name: internet-gateway-config
---
apiVersion: example.net/v1alpha1
```

Reviewer 3: Mind we are not pointing to specific CR (no name field). We could maybe point to a CRD, then this would work, thou readability is worse IMHO. Then we name it CRDRef or NetworkCRDRef?

Reviewer 2: oh, right, not an opinion on the name on the field but I really think it should be nested in its own field

Reviewer: > Then we name it CRDRef or NetworkCRDRef

User-visible APIs and docs should not treat CRDs as being distinct from built-in types.

}
```

To integrate pod networks with Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA), this proposal defines two new standard device attributes. These attributes allow `ResourceClaims` to select specific pod networks and allow the system to identify devices that attach workloads to a given network.

> A device that attaches a workload to a network must report the associated ResourceClaim device status with a reference to the network. The relationship between a device and a network can be determined by matching the device identifier and its attributes in the corresponding ResourceSlice.

Reviewer 3: Can we create subsection for the attributes stuff?

```golang
const (
	// StandardDeviceAttributePrefix is the prefix used for standard device attributes.

> 	StandardDeviceAttributePrefix = "resource.kubernetes.io/"

Reviewer 3: Since we want to use the standardized key: "resource.kubernetes.io" we need to define it in DRA WG. Not sure what is the best course of action here, either we define MN-specific one temporarily, and after maturing a bit go to DRA, or we go right away and block this until we get consensus in DRA.

Reviewer 2: temporary means you need to use a different domain

Reviewer 3: of course. We could maybe use "multinetwork.networking.k8s.io"?

	StandardDeviceAttributePodNetwork resourceapi.QualifiedName = StandardDeviceAttributePrefix + "podNetwork"
	// StandardDeviceAttributePodNetworkNamespace is a standard device attribute name
	// which describes the namespace of a pod network.
	// The value is a string value referring to the namespace of a pod network object.
  // The attribute is optional for the NetworkClass pointing to a non-namespaced GVK.
  // The attribute is mandatory for the NetworkClass pointing to a namespaced GVK.
	StandardDeviceAttributePodNetworkNamespace resourceapi.QualifiedName = StandardDeviceAttributePrefix + "podNetworkNamespace"
	// StandardDeviceAttributeNetworkClass is a standard device attribute name
	// which describes a NetworkClass.
	// The value is a string value referring to an existing NetworkClass object.
	StandardDeviceAttributeNetworkClass resourceapi.QualifiedName = StandardDeviceAttributePrefix + "networkClass"
)
```

### Example

A cluster admin defines which types of pod networks are available in the cluster by creating one or more `NetworkClass` objects. Each `NetworkClass` maps to a specific implementation-defined network resource.

```yaml

> apiVersion: multinetwork.networking.k8s.io/v1

Reviewer 2: remember this prefix requires api review

kind: NetworkClass
metadata:
  name: ovn-kubernetes
spec:
  group: k8s.ovn.org
  version: v1

>   kind: UserDefinedNetwork

Reviewer 5: is `UserDefinedNetwork`  a standard  or can be anything?

Author: `UserDefinedNetwork` is specific to OVN-Kubernetes. I just added a note to make it more clear.
So it can be anything,

---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: DeviceClass
metadata:
  name: ovn-kubernetes-udn
spec:
  selectors:
  - cel:

>       expression: device.attributes["resource.kubernetes.io"].networkClass == "ovn-kubernetes"

Reviewer 5: what's the relation between device class and network class? can a deviceclass can have more than one network class?

Author: A NetworkClass is a way to indicate what are the objects representing the networks in Kubernetes.
A DeviceClass is an admin managed resource to define how Devices can be consumed in Kubernetes (set selection and configuration). 
A DeviceClass can selects via Network name (`resource.kubernetes.io/podNetwork`) and/or via Network class (`resource.kubernetes.io/networkClass`), so it can select multiple network class.
```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: DeviceClass
metadata:
  name: any-network-class
spec:
  selectors:
  - cel:
      expression: device.attributes["resource.kubernetes.io"].networkClass == "network-class-a" || device.attributes["resource.kubernetes.io"].networkClass == "network-class-b"
```

Reviewer 5: can we also clarify this in design doc

Author: I tried to specify it in the latest version.

```

> A pod network is declaratively defined using an implementation-specific network object. The network implementation prepares the underlying networking resources and advertises the availability of the network via the Resource API using a ResourceSlice.

Reviewer 5: is pod network namespace scoped resource?

Author: It can be, but doesn't have to. the pod Network resource can be a cluster wide one. The reference to the namespace for the resource is optional.

Reviewer 5: can we also include these details in this doc?

Author: Added

```yaml
apiVersion: k8s.ovn.org/v1
kind: UserDefinedNetwork
metadata:
  name: blue-network
spec: 
  ...
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: kind-worker-ovn-kubernetes
spec:
  devices:
  - attributes:
      resource.kubernetes.io/podNetwork:
        string: blue-network
      resource.kubernetes.io/networkClass:
        string: ovn-kubernetes
    name: blue-network-resource

>   driver: ovn-kubernetes

Reviewer 2: there seem to be a bit of redundancy between driver and `networkClass`?

How will be the relations between drivers and network classes? can a driver support multiple network classes , is it 1:1, 1:N, N:1?

It looks reasonable to assume a driver has a one to one relation with a network class so maybe we can use that convention?

Author: The driver is an implementation. An Network API could have multiple implementation and we need to point to an (PodNetwork) resource to point to a network (not to its implementation). If a network API have multiple implementation, then its up to its API to handle it (via a controller field for example, or a label).

A Driver can have multiple NetworkClasses. For example, OVN-Kubernetes has 2 APIs, UserDefinedNetwork and ClusterUserDefinedNetwork, so it would require 2 NetworkClasses (1 for each Network API).

Reviewer 2: I see the point about a Driver supporting different APIs (like UserDefinedNetwork vs ClusterUserDefinedNetwork), but I’m worried this creates an ambiguity problem for the actual network configuration. If NetworkClass is just a pointer to an API and does not define an unique relation for a network, what happens when two classes target the same network with different settings or from different drivers?

Let's use the existing example

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: kind-worker-ovn-kubernetes
spec:
  devices:
  - attributes:
      resource.kubernetes.io/podNetwork:
        string: blue-network
      resource.kubernetes.io/networkClass:
        string: ovn-kubernetes 
    name: blue-network-resource
    driver: ovn-kubernetes
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: kind-worker-ovn-kubernetes
spec:
  devices:
  - attributes:
      resource.kubernetes.io/podNetwork:
        string: blue-network
      resource.kubernetes.io/networkClass:
        string: ovn-kubernetes-admin
    name: blue-network-resource-admin
    driver: ovn-kubernetes
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: kind-worker-ovn-kubernetes
spec:
  devices:
  - attributes:
      resource.kubernetes.io/podNetwork:
        string: blue-network
      resource.kubernetes.io/networkClass:
        string: kindnet
    name: blue-network-resource
    driver: kindnet
---
```

One driver might be able to handle multiple classes, I'm almost sure that two different drivers (e.g., OVN and Kindnet) cannot manage the same blue-network instance simultaneously.

Shouldn't there be a 1:1 binding between a podNetwork instance and its networkClass? If `blue-network` is created via the UserDefinedNetwork API, its class should be immutable and globally unique for that instance to prevent two drivers from fighting over the same ResourceSlice

Author: A pod network in this design is not only defined by its name, it's defined by it's name + the `NetworkClass`, so OVN and Kindnet would not manage the same `blue-network`, OVN would manage the `blue-network` of `NetworkClass` "ovn-kubernetes" and Kindnet would manage `blue-network` of `NetworkClass` "kindnet". There would be ambiguity for the user requesting attachement to this network if only the `resource.kubernetes.io/podNetwork` is specified in the request. This ambiguity can be removed if the `resource.kubernetes.io/networkClass` is also specified in the request.
```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: blue-network-attachment
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: blue-network
      exactly:
        deviceClassName: ovn-kubernetes-udn
        selectors:
          - cel:
              expression: device.attributes["resource.kubernetes.io"].podNetwork == "blue-network" && device.attributes["resource.kubernetes.io"].networkClass == "OVN-Kubernetes"
```
If you meant, that `NetworkClass` ovn-kubernetes-admin, ovn-kubernetes and kindnet are pointing to the same blue-network with the same GVK, then yes, I agree, this must be forbidden.
I added about the immutability of the NetworkClass and I also added that multiple NetworkClass cannot point to the same GVK, so we have 1:1 binding between a pod network type and its networkClass.

  nodeName: kind-worker
  pool:
    name: kind-worker
```

A workload requests attachment to a pod network by creating a ResourceClaim. The claim selects a network by matching the standard device attributes exposed in the ResourceSlice.

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: blue-network-attachment
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: blue-network
      exactly:
        deviceClassName: ovn-kubernetes-udn
        selectors:
          - cel:
              expression: device.attributes["resource.kubernetes.io"].podNetwork == "blue-network"
```

Once the workload is attached to the network, the network implementation reports the attachment details in the ResourceClaim device status. This includes implementation-specific connection data such as interface name, hardware address, and assigned IPs.

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: blue-network-attachment
spec:
...
status:
...
  devices:
  - device: blue-network-resource
    driver: ovn-kubernetes
    networkData:
      hardwareAddress: 5a:9f:d8:84:fb:51
      interfaceName: net1
      ips:
      - 10.10.1.2/24
    pool: kind-worker
```

> **Note:** The selection of the `PodNetwork` and the `NetworkClass` can be done in the ResourceClaim but also in the DeviceClass.

Reviewer 5: Each pod network would be managed by only one network class right?  so if pod network is selected by resource claim then user doesn't need to explicitly specify network class?

Author: Each pod network type would be managed by only one network class yes.
You would need to explicitly specify the network class, as if there are 2 pod network types (so 2 network class), it could happen that 2 objects are created with the same name:
- my-net from NetworkClass-A by OVN-Kubernetes
- my-net from NetworkClass-B by Cilium

Reviewer 5: ah got it. Thanks

Here is a diagram below representing the cluster preparation and the creation of a pod network:

![Diagram](images/NetworkClass-1.png)

1. A cluster administrator deploys a pod network implementation together with a `NetworkClass` that points to the Group/Version/Kind of the implementation network resource.

> 2. A user (determined by the implementation itself) creates a pod network using the implementation-defined network object.

Reviewer 5: do we need to update diagram to show user creates pod network? in pic, it was shown DRA driver creates pod network.

Author: In the first diagram, the user create the pod network (type: `UserDefinerNetwork` and name `blue-network`)
I am not sure what you mean "in pic, it was shown DRA driver creates pod network.", maybe you refer to the previous design proposal?

Reviewer 5: i think step3 also shows DRA Driver creates pod network, hence the confusion

Author: Do you have any suggestion to make it more clear?

> 3. The pod network implementation provisions the underlying network and advertises its availability using a ResourceSlice.

Reviewer 5: Should pod networking be implemented as part of a DRA driver, or is it expected that users choose a DRA driver and a pod networking implementation independently as separate components? Is there any community guidance or recommended best practice on this?

Author: I think it depends on the implementation. @aojea could also say more I believe on this topic. I think it is preferable to have specialized drivers for each.
CNI-DRA-Driver is an experimentation and should be generic (As CNI can do anything) and I think it's very difficult to make it work at the end to cover all the use-cases.

Reviewer 2: There are multiple reasons why you can not build an uber driver in networking that fits all things, but one of the most important is the dataplane implementation, if you use the kernel stack (netfilter,...) or you use openflow or ebpf or dpdk, or ... is unavoidable that you had to make architectural decisions based on  the technology you are using. If you have worked on the codebases of cilium, ovn-kubernetes , kindnet, calico, ... you will see that, redirecting flows, recirculating packets over interfaces, ... so the goal of drivers is that, offer flexibility to implementations to experiment and use different low level details, but implement a common API

2. The pod network implementation attaches the Pod to the requested network.
3. The pod network implementation reports the attachment status to the ResourceClaim device status.

#### Identification of a network

Via the DRA feature in Kubernetes, an allocated device is reported in the ResourceClaim Status and identified by its set of device name, pool name and driver name ([MakeDeviceID(driver, pool, device string)](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.35.0/staging/src/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/structured/schedulerapi/types.go#L37)). The devices are allocated from the ResourceSlices based on the request and constraints in the ResourceClaim spec. An allocated device and its attributes can then be retrieved in the ResourceSlices via its identifier (device name, pool name and driver name). Thus, the pod network and networkClass can be retrieved in the attributes of the device in the ResourceSlice.

Here is an example below:
```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: blue-network-attachment
spec:
...
status:
...
  allocation:
    devices:
      results:
      - device: blue-network-resource
        driver: ovn-kubernetes

>         pool: kind-worker

Reviewer 5: I couldn't understand the use of pool name in this example? what's the purpose of it?

Author: This is DRA. The `Identification of a network` section covers how it works. When a device is allocated, we can refer to it in a resourceSlice by its set of device name, pool name and driver name.
https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/#resourceslice

        request: blue-network
```

The identifier of the allocated device is:
* Device Name: blue-network-resource
* Pool Name: kind-worker
* Driver Name: ovn-kubernetes

> The device can be retrieved in the ResourceSlice:

Reviewer 3: Will just leave a comment here for other reviewers to consider. The alternative idea is to ask the ResourceClaim.status to be populated with the direct reference to the Network via the opaque data field of a device, see https://github.com/mskrocki/multi-network-api/blob/design/docs/core-design.md#resourceclaim-status.

This would remove the need to pull ResourceSlice object for identification, and all data would be self-contained in ResourceClaim.status.

   3. The reported status includes sufficient information to identify the network attachment, such as:
      * Network interface name
      * Hardware address (if applicable)
      * Assigned IP addresses (if applicable)

### Conceptual Ecosystem Integration

The following section is not a proposal to modify the Service Kubernetes APIs. It is a conceptual illustration only, intended to demonstrate how the `NetworkClass` abstraction proposed above could be integrated with other Kubernetes ecosystem APIs in the future. This section defines no requirements, no commitments, and no implied API changes.

Conceptually, Kubernetes APIs that need to operate on a specific pod network could reference a network using a (class, name) tuple. This allows APIs to identify a network without understanding its implementation details.

```golang
// Network identifies a specific pod network instance.
type Network struct {
	// Class identifies the NetworkClass responsible for the network.
	Class string

	// Name identifies the network object.
	Name string

	// Name identifies the namespace of the network object.
  // Optional if the network object is a non-namespace object.
	Namespace *string
}
```

> The following example shows how a Kubernetes Service API could conceptually reference a pod network using `NetworkClass`. This is provided solely as an example to illustrate how `NetworkClass` enables ecosystem integration.

Reviewer 5: so based on other PR from @mskrocki , k8s service for secondary nic would be supported only through gateway API.. should we update this accordingly?

Author: It depends on the consensus with SIG-Network.

# NetworkClass

## Proposal

`NetworkClass` defines a mapping between a Kubernetes-recognized network class and an implementation-specific pod network object type. It does not define networking behavior or semantics. Instead, it provides a classification and discovery mechanism that allows Kubernetes APIs and controllers to recognize and integrate multiple pod networks.

> `NetworkClass` is a cluster-scoped resource. It is expected to be installed by the cluster administrator together with a pod network implementation.

Reviewer 6: Would be good to make these explicit:

* Can a NetworkClass Spec change after creation?
* Do we expect NetworkClasses to be added/removed after the cluster becomes operational?

Reviewer: It seems like all of the fields in NetworkClassSpec should be immutable.

I would certainly hope you can add new NetworkClasses to an operational cluster, since otherwise a lot of existing k8s users are going to have to reinstall from scratch. :slightly_smiling_face: 

(OpenShift used to support migrating a running cluster between openshift-sdn and ovn-kubernetes (up until 4.17 when openshift-sdn was removed completely), and if NetworkClasses and OVN-K UDNs had existed at that point, then it would make sense that migrating the cluster to OVN-K would install a NetworkClass, and migrating away from OVN-K_ would remove it.)

Author: For mutability of the NetworkClass and the deletion of it, there is this paragraph:
`A NetworkClass is immutable once created, so the Group/Version/Kind referenced by a NetworkClass cannot be changed. A NetworkClass cannot be deleted while at least one pod network object belonging to that NetworkClass exists.`
For adding a new one during cluster runtime, I didn't feel the need to specify it would be allowed.
